.. _preface:

.. rubric:: For the instructor

This book contains all the example programs used in my CoderDojo class
to teach Python programming. The primary goal of the class is to teach
programming using action games to make learning more interesting. Some
of the examples are entirely focused on introducing new language
concepts or showing how the Pygame Zero API works, but most are a
mixture of both.

The intention is that each program in the example chapters is *brief,
complete* and *introduces only one or two new concepts*.

-  The programs are short so that students can feasibly type them in
   during the class. Typing for themselves is very valuable for
   beginners, because it helps them learn to type, and to type precisely
   without mistakes (which show up as syntax errors). Even if it takes
   them a while, they should feel proud when they type a program
   correctly in the end! [1]_

-  Each program is complete to avoid the confusion caused by worksheets
   that tell a student to add lines to a program piecemeal. If they make
   an error or omit a step they may never recover and not produce a
   working program. Also being *complete* and *separate* means the whole
   class can be told to skip to the same program and it won’t matter so
   much that some of them didn’t complete all the prior programs.

-  Introducing ideas one or two at a time allows the students to learn
   mostly through *doing* and observing the output of each program
   rather than memorizing. To this end the *order* of the programs
   within each chapter has been carefully selected. The chapter ordering
   is more loose and it is possible to skip back and forth between
   chapters. If the text quizzes or the Python fundamentals are boring
   the students, skip ahead to the graphical games, then come back to
   the earlier examples when necessary.

Following each program are some ideas for how students can modify the
program. Hopefully they will go further and modify these programs into
their own unique games! The difficulty of these suggestions varies, to
accommodate students of different age and ability.

This book may be suitable for self-teaching by a motivated learner, but
does not attempt to be comprehensive or give detailed explanations
because it is intended to be used in a class with an instructor who will
fill in the gaps as needed by the students.

.. rubric:: The second edition

I discovered two important things from feedback from the first edition:

1. It’s not possible to learn coding with only a single lesson each
   week. Therefore if that is all we have, the time is better spent
   inspiring interest in the subject rather than memorizing syntax or
   wrapping their heads around abstract concepts. Those who are
   motivated to learn more in their own time will require more syntax
   and concepts, of course, and hence the Fundamentals chapter has been
   greatly expanded for their use.

2. Many students wanted to create larger games than the simple examples
   given in the first edition. It was always the intention that they
   absorb the knowledge from the examples and then go on to greater
   larger games of their own but some will require more hand-holding.

Therefore there are four new chapters of tutorial style examples. These
are intended to be done in class, with the initial code file given to
the students to save time. They are intended to create a sense of
accomplishment as each subsequent modifcation improves the game, and
also to allow lots of scope for student creativity and customisation.

As noted above, tutorials can become confusing, but I hope the class
instructors can resolve any issues.

.. [1]
   For writing essays nowadays people can use voice input and
   touch-screen input, but for programming the majority of programmers
   still type on a keyboard. There’s no sign of this changing in the
   immediate future, so practising keyboard skills now is still very
   important for the future. Students can practise at home with a
   program such as TuxType. That being said, many programs contain
   similar code, so it’s also a useful skill for them be able to copy
   and paste from their other programs.
